### Gene regulation during $\lambda$ phage infection
- When expressed, the N protein binds to nut sites on the nascent N and cro RNAs
- This allows it to interact with transcribing RNAP molecules (with a complex of other bacterial proteins)
- This causes a conformational change in RNAP that allows it to ignore the terminators found at the end of the N and cro genes.
- Antitermination by N aloows transcription of the delayed early genes
	- N and cro continue to be expressed
- Antitermination

- During the delayed early phase, the CII protein is expressed. It plays a critical role in the decision between lytic and lysogenic phases
- If the host bacteria are growing well (rich nutrient conditions) 
	- The bacteria produce high levels of proteases
	- Because CII is unstable, these proteases easily degrade it.
	- The phage enters the lytic cycle

- Establishing the lysogenic phage: Activation of the $P_{RE}$ promoter CII activates transcription from the $P_{RE}$ promoter (Activation)
- Antisense downregulation:
	- Establishing the lysogenic phage: Downregulation of Cro expression
		- The transcript generated by $P_{RE}$  contains a region that is complementary to the cro mRNA region.
		- By annealing of these two RNAs, translation of the cro ORF is blocked
	- The cl portion of the transcript remains 
- Feedback Inhibition:
	- Maintaining lysogeny: Feedback inhibition of $\lambda$ repressor expression
		- High levels of $\lambda$ repressor block its own promoter
- Derepression:
	- Excap from lysogeny: Degradation of $\lambda$ repressor
	- DNA-damaging agents (UV light) trigger self-cleavage of the $\lambda$ 
- Antitermination
	- At the decision point, if CII is degraded, the lytic cycle proceeds.
		- Key to this is build up of the delayed early gene product Q.
		- Q functions as an antiterminator, that allows for transcription of the late phase genes
	- Q functions by binding the qut site at the $P_R$ promoter and interacting with RNAP, which causes it to ignore the proximal terminator

### Overview: Eukaryotic RNA Polymerases
- Bacteria have a single RNAP
	- Different groups of genes are transcribed by switching the sigma (\sigma) factor
	- Different sigma factors recognize different promoters
	- Translation begins co-transcriptionally (ribosomes engage the nascent RNA transcript).
- Eukarytoes have three nuclear RNA polymerases: RNAP I, II, and III


### Discovery of the Three Nuclear Eukaryotic RNAPs
Bob Roeder and William Rutter used ion exchange chromatography to demonstrate in 1969 that there are three eukaryotic RNA polymerases.

- Sea urchin embryos were used as a source of eukaryotic cells. A protein lysate was prepared from these cells.
- DEAE anion exchange chromatography was performed to separate 

### Anion exchange chromatography
- One type of ion exchange chromatography, in which the separation of proteins is based on charge
- The column is composed of a substance with a positive charge (e.g., DEAE)
- Proteins with an overall positive charge (high pI) do not bind.
- Proteins with many negative charges (low pI) are retained most tightly.
- Increasing concentrations of an ionic solution are used to elute retained proteins from the column, fraction by fraction

#### Roeder and Rutter identification of the three RNAPs
- Green: Protein concentration in each fraction
- Blue: Linear gradient of ammonium sulfate for elution
- Red: RNA polymerase activity (incorporation of labeled UMP into RNA)

#### Roles for RNAP I, II and III
- The results of several different types of experiments subsequently showed that each RNAP transcribes different classes of genes. These are summarized below.
- RNAP I: Most rRNAs
- RNAP II: mRNAs, Most snRNAs, miRNAs
- RNAP III: tRNAs SS rRNA, U6 snRNA, Other small RNAs

### Alpha ($\alpha$)- Amanitin
- a toxin that is produced in poisonous mushrooms
- RNAP II (1 to 10 $\micro$g) and III (10 to 1000 $\micro$g) are affected 
- Example: Identifying the RNAP responsible for 7SK transcription
- In vitro transcription was performed using a nuclear extract competent for transcription (containing all three RNAPs)
- A plasmid containing the 7SK gene and its natural promoter was included.
	- As a control, a plasmid with the VA1 gene, known to be transcribed by RNAP III, was also included
- Increasing concentrations of $\alpha$-amanitin were added, and the amount of transcript produced was monitored by electrophoresis.
- 7SK RNA levels were reduced at trevels of $\alpha$-Amanitin above 10 $\micro$g/mL, indicating that RNAP II is responsible

## RNAP II Structure and Composition
### Composition of the Three Eukaryotic RNAPs
Like bacterial RNAP, eukaryotic RNAPs are multi-subunit enzymes.
- RNAP I - 14 subunits
- RNAP II - 12 subunits
- RNAP III - 17 subunits
Some subunits are shared between the three polymerases

Nomenclature: 
- Some older studies referred to the polymerases a sRNAP

RNAP II transcribes the largest number of different genes, including all protein-coding genes. It is probably the most regulated of the three nuclear RNAPs and is by far the most studied.
The composition of RNAP II was determined by chromatography, then confirm by Rick Young and collegues using purification
- They worked with yeast as a source of eukarytoic
  
### Epitope Taging for Purification of yeast RNAP II
Young and collegues engineered a yeast strain that expressed the known Rpb3 subunit of RNAP II with an HA epitope tag at its N-terminus.
- Yeast cells were lysed, and Rpb3 was immunoprecipitated using an HA antibody under conitions that did not 

All RNAP II subunits coppurified with HA-Rpb3, as described in cells grwon in either 35S or 32P
- The autoradiograph of the SDS-PAGE analyses is shown to the right
- Ten of the twelve subunits were detected in this study. The subunits were named systematically: Rpb1 Rpb2: RNA polymerase B, subunit 1, 2
- Two subunits--Rpb11 and Rppb 12 were unresolved from the two other two subunits. These were identified in later studies.
- At least two subunits are phosphorylated. In particular, the largest subunit, Rpb1, appears highly phosphorylated.
- Convention: 
	- Gene names (wild type) are written in full capitals and italics: RPB1
	- Protein names are not written in italics.
	- Human protein names: usually capitalized: RPB1
	- Yeast protein names; First letter capitalized: Rpb1 (sometimes Rpb1p)

### RNAP II Subunits
- The 12 subunit compositionof RNAP II is conserved among eukarytoes (from yeast to mammals).
- Genes for all 12 subunits have been sequenced
- The CTD of RNAP II
	- A repeated CTD 
	- Phosphorylation of the CTD of RNAP II
	- Five of the seven amino acids in the CTD consensus sequence are potential phosphoacceptors (they can be phosphorylated in eukaryotic cells)
	- Ser, Thr, and Tyr
	- YSPTSPS
- Different forms of Rpb1
	- Electrophoresis analysis of early preparations of RNAP II showed three bands that correspond to the largest subunit, Rpb1, in addition to bands for the other subunits.
		- RNAP II_o
		- RNAP II_a
		- RNAP II_b

#### Roles of Rpb1 Phosphorylation
- The II_b form that was detected in early preparations was the result of proteolysis and is not likey found in cells.
- There is a protease-sensitive site on Rpb1 just upstream of the CTD. In fact, the CTD can be removed by treating Rpb1 with chymotrypsin.
- The other two forms representing phosphorylated and unphosphorylated CTD are found in cells
- Early experiments by the Michael Dahmus group and others demonstrated the following:
	- RNAP II with unphosphorylated Rpb1 CTD binds to promoters
	- The elongating RNAP II contains a phosphorylated CTD

#### Crystal Structure of RNAP II
- Through X-ray crystallography, the first crystal structures of yeast RNAPII were solved in 2000 and 2001.
- Just like bacterial RNAP, there is a cleft in which the DNA template passes through
- The catalytic centre contains a Mg3+ ion. A second Mg2+ ion is present in low concentration and enters the enzyme bound the each substrate nucleotide
- The CTD was not part of the crystal structural generated from these studies it is flexible and sticks out of the globular core, meaning it is disorded and therefore cannot be seens as  a part of crystal structure)

## Eukaryotic Promoters
The three eukaryotic RNAPs bind and recognize different promoters

- Clas 1 Genes
	- Trancribed by RNAP I and have class iI promoters - rRNA precuosor
- Class II
	- Recognized by RNAP II
	- They are considered to have two parts:
		- Core promoter - attracts and binds General Transcription Factors (GTFs) and RNAP II at a basal level and stes the transcription start site and direction of transcription
		- Proximal promoter - helps attract GTFs and RNAP II to the core promoter and includes promoters 
	- Core promoter elements
		-  modular and can contain almost any combination of the following elements (at least one of four promoter is missing):
			- TATA box (found on ~10$% of promoters)
			- TFIIB recognition element (BRE)
			- Initiator (Inr) (found on 50% of promoters)
			- Downstream core elements (DCE)
				- Downstream promoter element (DPE)
				- Motif ten element (MTE)
			- At least one of the four core elements is missing in most promoters
		- TATA box
			- Promoters are often sub-classified as TATA-containing or TATA-less,
			  referring to the presence of absenece of this elements
			- It consists of the consensus sequence TATAAA
	- Proximal promoter elements:
		- sequences usually found upstream of class II core promoters.
		- They differ from core promoters in that they bind to sequence-specific transcription factors (ssTFs, or simply TFs), as opposed to the general transcription machinery (GTFs and RNAP II).
		- Upstream promoter elements can be 
			- Orientation-independent: They still function if they are switched to 
			- Orientation-depentdent
- Class I
	- RNAP I transcribes the ribosomal RNA gene (rDNA)
	- The rDNA gene is repeated hundreds of times in tandem and produces an rRNA precursor that is processed to form the mature rRNA s that form the r
