## Lecture 5 - Biochemical Energy Generation and Utilization
### Spontaneity is determined by Gibbs Free Energy:
$\Delta H - T \Delta S <= 0$

- Formulated by J. Willard in 1878
- The change in free energy for a process is $\Delta G$
- Consequently, spontaneous processes at constant temperature and pressure have negative $\Delta G$
- Negative $\Delta G$ values ($\Delta G$ < 0) are said to be exergonic (Greek: ergon, work)
- Positive $\Delta G$ values ($\Delta G$ > 0) are said to be endergonic; they must be driven by the input of free energy
- Organisms $\to$ not at equilibrium = Exchange matter/energy for homeostasis
- Enzymes $\to$ increase rate of reaction -> reaching faster

### Is life spontaneous
- At one time, many scientists believed that life, with its inherent complexity and order, somehow evaded the laws of thermodynamics. This is a misconception
- The entropy of living matter is indeed less than that of the products to which it decays
- Life persists, however, because a system (a living organism) can be ordered at the expense of disordering its surroundings to an even greater extent.
- In other words, the total entropy of the system plus its surroundings increases, as required by the second law. Living organisms achieve order by disordering (breaking down) the nutrients they consume. Thus, the entropy content of food is as important as its energy content.

- In other words, life is excellent at increasing the entropy of the universe. Life is an entropy-producing machine!

### Ribonucleotide Triphosphates
- ATP/GTP/UTP - Energy
- CTP - Cofactor

### What is NTP Currency Used For?
- Enzymatic Reactions (Energy Potential)
- Phosphate Donor (Kinase-specific Reactions)
- Cellular signaling pathways (movement; messengers)
- Neuronal Signaling
- Movement (Molecular Level)
	- Across membranes
	- Internally through the cell (through cytoplasm; transfer to organelle)
	- Assembly of structures 

### ATP Hydrolysis Releases Energy
- Hydrolysis of 1 mol of ATP = -7.3 Kcal/mol

### NDP-intermediates
- UDP-Glucose Pyrophosphorylase catalyzes the formation of UDP-Glucose from UTP and Glucose-1-Phosphate
- UDP serves as a good leaving group

